Chapter 1. It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters. "My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last?" Mr. Bennet replied that he had not."But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told me all about it." Mr. Bennet made no answer. "Do you not want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife impatiently."_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."This was invitation enough."Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week.""What is his name?""Bingley.""Is he married or single?""Oh!  Single, my dear, to be sure!  A single man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year.  What a fine thing for our girls!""How so?  How can it affect them?""My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome!  You must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.""Is that his design in settling here?""Design!  Nonsense, how can you talk so!  But it is very likely that he _may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes.""I see no occasion for that.  You and the girls may go, or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the party.""My dear, you flatter me.  I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five grown-up daughters, she ought to giveover thinking of her own beauty.""In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.""But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood.""It is more than I engage for, I assure you.""But consider your daughters.  Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them.  Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no newcomers.  Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit him if you do not.""You are over-scrupulous, surely.  I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.""I desire you will do no such thing.  Lizzy is not a bit better than the others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humoured as Lydia.  But you are always giving _her_ the preference.""They have none of them much to recommend them," replied he; "they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters.""Mr. Bennet, how _can_ you abuse your own children in such a way?  You take delight in vexing me.  You have no compassion for my poor nerves.""You mistake me, my dear.  I have a high respect for your nerves.  They are my old friends.  I have heard you mention them with consideration these last twenty years at least.""Ah, you do not know what I suffer.""But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.""It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not visit them.""Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them all."Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character.  _Her_ mind was less difficult to develop.  She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper.  When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.Chapter 9Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters.  In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgement of her situation.  The note was immediately dispatched, and its contents as quickly complied with.  Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield.  She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable.  After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughter all attended her into the breakfast parlour.  Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected."Indeed I have, sir," was her answer.  "She is a great deal too ill to be moved.  Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass a little longer on your kindness.""Removed!" cried Bingley.  "It must not be thought of.  My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her removal.""You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility, "that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she remains with us."Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments."I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends I do not know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper I have ever met with.  I often tell my other girls they are nothing to _her_.  You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.""Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five minutes.  At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.""That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth."You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her."Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly.""I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen through I am afraid is pitiful.""That is as it happens.  It does not follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.""Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.""I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you were a studier of character.  It must be an amusing study.""Yes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing.  They have at least that advantage.""The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subjects for such a study.  In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society.""But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in them for ever.""Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood.  "I assure you there is quite as much of _that_ going on in the country as in town."Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away.  Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph."I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shops and public places.  The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?""When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town it is pretty much the same.  They have each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.""Aye--that is because you have the right disposition.  But that gentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothing at all.""Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for her mother.  "You quite mistook Mr. Darcy.  He only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town, which you must acknowledge to be true.""Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger.  I know we dine with four-and-twenty families."Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance.  His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile.  Elizabeth, for the sake of saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away."Yes, she called yesterday with her father.  What an agreeable man Sir William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he?  So much the man of fashion!  So genteel and easy!  He had always something to say to everybody.  _That_ is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.""Did Charlotte dine with you?""No, she would go home.  I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies.  For my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work; _my_ daughters are brought up very differently.  But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I assure you.  It is a pity they are not handsome!  Not that I think Charlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend.""She seems a very pleasant young woman.""Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain.  Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty.  I do not like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody better looking.  It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality.  When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother Gardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away.  But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young.  However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.""And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth impatiently.  "There has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way.  I wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!""I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said Darcy."Of  a fine, stout, healthy love it may.  Everything nourishes what is strong already.  But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away."Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again.  She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy.  Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required.  She performed her part indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her carriage.  Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward.  The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age.  She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance.  She was very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it.  His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball.  But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill."Lydia declared herself satisfied.  "Oh! yes--it would be much better to wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again.  And when you have given _your_ ball," she added, "I shall insist on their giving one also.  I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not."Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of all Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.
